first install ubuntu 22.04 lts from ubuntu store and run it on vmware from youtube .
Steps to install docker in it
1)sudo apt install docker.io(will take 4 - 5 mins)
2)clear
3)docker --version (to check the version of the docker)
4)sudo systemctl status docker ( to check the status of docker package)
5) if its inactive then write the command
sudo systemctl enable --now docker
6) press Q to exit the running command
7)clear
8)docker run hello-world (permission will be denied)
9)sudo docker run hello-world(it will work!!!!!)


container:-a way to package application with all the necessary dependencies and configurations.makes developement and deployment process more easily.

where do containers live???
container repository
private repository
public repository for docker containers


How containers improve the developement process??
before containers, you will have to install most applications in your OS. Multiple steps of installation and there are chances of going wrong in many steps. 

After containers , you dont install the softwares in your OS. Own isolated environment.packaged with all needed configuration. One command to install the app.

How containers can imporve deployment process???

Before containers :- Developer will give instructions for deployment in jar files with a set of instructions. Now this will go to the operation team and they will do the whole task.This led to dependency of version conflicts.Misunderstandings(forget to mention something important)

After Containers:-Developers and operations work together to package the application in a container.No environmental configuration needed on server - except docke run time.

Technically container is made up pf images. In the base we have linux base image because of small in size.Application image on top. On the top of this configuration data.


Difference between docker image and docker container???
docker image:-actual package , artifact , that can be moved around

docker container :- actually start the application, container enviroment is created. 

Docker vs virtual machine???
Both are vritualization tools.
Docker virtualizes the application layer.When you download the application layer it virtualizes the image.

Virtual machine virtualizes the complete operating system. This means when you download the image it boots up the system.


Basic docker commands   
sudo docker pull redis:-pulling an image online from docker hub
sudo docker images :- to check all the images  you have pulled.

--till this point we have just pulled images

sudo docker redis:-this will actually start the image
sudo docker ps :- list of all running containers

ctrl+c :- to exit

sudo docker run -d redis:-to get the id of the container

sudo docker stop [container id] :- stops the running container

sudo docker start[container id] :- to start the container again

sudo docker ps -a :- lists all the running and stopped containers

sudo docker run [] :- pulls image and start the container

Container port vs Host port:-
Multiple containers can run on your host machine.Your laptop has only certain ports available.Conflict when same port on host machine.

sudo docker run -p[port number of host (any port number)]:[port number of the image] redis(image name) = to bind the container


Debugging the container:-

sudo docker logs container_id / container_name = gives the logs 

sudo docker run  -d -p6000:6379 --name redis_olderversion redis = creates a new container with different name and same port

sudo docker exec -it [container id] /bin/bash =takes you to the running container


COOL TRICKS:- 
sudo docker image ls -q  = list all the images id
sudo docker image rm -f  $(docker image ls -q) = removes all images
sudo docker container rm-f $(docker image ls -a -q) = remove all containers

Docker Compose:-